Frequent itemset mining is a fundamental task in data mining crucial for various applications such as recommendation systems and market analysis. Traditional algorithms like FP-growth and Apriori are effective but suffer from memory overhead and multiple passes. In this project, we used a novel approach known as Dynamic Prefix Tree (DPT), to address memory overhead and multiple passes. The DPT technique utilizes a single dynamically adaptive prefix tree to represent transactional datasets and computing frequent itemsets. This innovative method significantly reduces memory consumption and processing costs compared to existing novel approaches. By eliminating the need for multiple trees, DPT enhances processing speed , avoiding unnecessary scans and tree constructions. We have experimented the dynamic prefix algorithm with various strategies with object-oriented programming (OOP) in Java and tried improving it further. We attempted to reduce the number of nodes in prefix tree and reduce the DPT calls, as well as to directly generate maximal itemsets using the DPT structure. However, our experiments showed that these optimization efforts were not successful, as the itemsets have multiple occurrences in the dataset but not the single occurrence. Copying and merging operations, as well as the use of the MFI (Maximal Frequent Itemset) algorithm, did not yield significant improvements in performance. This suggests that the DPT approach is already a highly efficient solution for frequent itemset mining. The DPT structure is designed to find frequently occurring itemsets efficiently within the tree, thereby minimizing memory requirements and enhancing scalability for large datasets. Unlike traditional methods, DPT offers a direct representation by generating a prefix tree consisting of all frequently occurring itemsets.
